README.md, before:

# What is this?
This is a 12 week programm for the python programming language. 

## Target audience
This course targets people interested in the programming language `python`. No prior knowledge of the language is needed. Basic IT knowledge of your operation system (installing software, setting environment variables) is needed to setup your system.

It is an advantage if you have basic knowledge of other programming languages.

## Structure
This kickstart programm is divided in 12 chapters. Read one chapter per week and do the corresponding exercises of the chapter.

Every chapter has at least one exercise. The exercises build up on each other and have a unique name (e.g. Ex3a1, Ex3a2, Ex3a3, Ex3b1). The name Ex3a1 stands for "Exercise for chapter 3, alternative 'a', exercise number 1). The 'a' stands for exercise path A. Beginn with exercises from path 'a' and continue the path until you have solved all exercises for the chapter. 

If you have problems and cannot solve Ex3a1 have a look at the solution folder. Try to solve the exercise after looking at the solution. Then try to solve an alternative exercise ('b', 'c', ...) if available. 

## Let's start
[Here](content/overview.md) is the chapter overview for your 12 week python programm.

Commit message:

Add chapter "Learning a programming language"

README.md, after:

# What is this?
This is a 12 week programm for the python programming language. 

## Target audience
This course targets people interested in the programming language `python`. No prior knowledge of the language is needed. Basic IT knowledge of your operation system (installing software, setting environment variables) is needed to setup your system.

It is an advantage if you have basic knowledge of other programming languages.

## Structure
This kickstart programm is divided in 12 chapters. Read one chapter per week and do the corresponding exercises of the chapter.

Every chapter has at least one exercise. The exercises build up on each other and have a unique name (e.g. Ex3a1, Ex3a2, Ex3a3, Ex3b1). The name Ex3a1 stands for "Exercise for chapter 3, alternative 'a', exercise number 1). The 'a' stands for exercise path A. Beginn with exercises from path 'a' and continue the path until you have solved all exercises for the chapter. 

If you have problems and cannot solve Ex3a1 have a look at the solution folder. Try to solve the exercise after looking at the solution. Then try to solve an alternative exercise ('b', 'c', ...) if available. 

## Learning a programming language
This course teaches you the basics of the programming language `python`. Knowing a language and be familiar with its possibilities and also with its limitations is an important part on your learning journey.

If this is one of your first programming languages you learn, than this is only the first of many steps you must take to call yourself a "real programmer" or "software developer". There a literally thousands of books about topics like software engineering, software architecture, clean code, design patterns and principles, test driven development, running and monitoring your software, etc, etc. 

It is not the focus of this 12 week programm to teach you how to become a professional software engineer. We will only focus on a little part of the whole picture: and this is for this programm a short introduction to python.

If you are a beginner, don't be discouraged by the vast amount of advanced topics you need to know and understand to call yourself a software engineer. See it as a great possibility to keep learning and improving yourself. Take it slowly, go step by step and enjoy your journey. It is very, very worthwile :) 

## Let's start
[Here](content/overview.md) is the chapter overview for your 12 week python programm.
